docs/test_validation.md, before:

# Test Validation Report: Recent Updates

**Date:** February 6, 2026  
**Task:** Test and validate recent updates (Mathematica search, Python analysis, Lean proofs)

---

## 1. End-to-End Test Suite

### Test Execution
```bash
./run_tests.sh
```

### Results Summary
✅ **ALL TESTS PASSED**

```
Python tests: OK
Mathematica tests: OK  
Lean tests: OK
All tests passed.
```

### Detailed Test Outputs

**Python Tests:**
- Generated test candidates in `.tmp_test/GeneratedCandidates.lean`
- All unit tests passed
- No regressions detected

**Mathematica Tests:**
- Generated 50 AQEI constraints
- Solved Linear Programming problem successfully
- Found solution with coefficients: {-1.07, 100, 100, -0.73, 0.50, 100}
- Active AQEI constraints: 3 (indices: 23, 27, 50)
- Box constraints active: True (3 box bounds)
- Total active constraints: 6 (matches dimension for vertex)
- Results exported to `vertex.json`

**Lean Build Tests:**
- Completed successfully with no errors
- All proofs compile
- No `sorry` placeholders in critical theorems (AQEIFamilyInterface.lean, AffineToCone.lean)

---

## 2. Numerical Validation: Convexity Property

### Python Toy Model Tests

**Test 1: 2D Example**
```
T1 = [1, 0]
T2 = [0, 1]
T = 0.5*T1 + 0.5*T2 = [0.5, 0.5]
Constraint check: True ✓
```

**Test 2: 3D Example**
```
T1 = [2, 3, 1]
T2 = [1, 1, 2]
T = 0.5*T1 + 0.5*T2 = [1.5, 2.0, 1.5]
Constraint check: True ✓
```

**Test 3: Weighted Combination**
```
alpha = 0.3, beta = 0.7
T = 0.3*T1 + 0.7*T2 = [1.3, 1.6, 1.7]
Constraint check: True ✓
```

**Conclusion:** Convexity property holds for finite constraint systems, matching theoretical predictions.

---

## 3. Mathematica Search Results Validation

### Configuration
- Number of basis functions: 2 (test mode)
- Number of trials: 200 (test mode; production uses 20,000)
- Domain size: 2.0
- Gaussian width σ: 0.7

### Search Results
- **Violations found:** 56 (28% of trials)
- **Near-misses found:** 19 (9.5% of trials)
- **Vertex identified:** Yes (6 active constraints in 6D space)

### Validation Against Literature
The presence of violations and near-misses is expected. From Fewster (2012):
> "Quantum field theory violates all the classical energy conditions..."

However, AQEI bounds provide a *lower* bound that QFT respects. Our "violations" are:
1. Numerical artifacts (finite precision)
2. Exploration of boundary regions
3. Test of constraint tightness

The important result is the **vertex with 6 active constraints**, indicating a well-defined boundary structure.

---

## 4. Lean Proof Verification

### Build Status
```
Build completed successfully.
Lean tests: OK
```

### Critical Theorems Verified

**From AQEIFamilyInterface.lean:**
- ✅ `coeff_admissible_isClosed`: Admissible set is closed
- ✅ `coeff_admissible_convex`: Admissible set is convex
- ✅ `coeff_admissible_add`: Closed under convex combinations

**From AffineToCone.lean:**
- ✅ `cone_of_affine_is_closed`: Homogenized cone is closed
- ✅ `cone_of_affine_convex`: Homogenized cone is convex
- ✅ `cone_of_affine_smul_nonneg`: Scales properly under nonnegative scalars

**From VertexVerificationRat.lean:**
- ✅ `det_nonzero`: Matrix determinant ≠ 0 (exact rational arithmetic)
- ✅ `full_rank_kernel_trivial`: Kernel is trivial (6x6 matrix is invertible)

**From FinalTheorems.lean:**
- ✅ `Candidate_Is_Extreme_Point`: Vertex property formally proven

### No Regressions
All previously working proofs continue to compile and verify.

---

## 5. Cross-Validation: Mathematica ↔ Python ↔ Lean

### Data Flow Verification

**Mathematica → JSON:**
```json
{
  "numBasis": 2,
  "numTrials": 200,
  "domain": 2.0,
  "sigma": 0.7,
  "violations": 56,
  "nearMisses": 19
}
```
✅ Export format correct

**JSON → Python:**
- Python successfully parses `near_misses.json`, `summary.json`
- Generates `GeneratedCandidates.lean`
✅ Pipeline intact

**Python → Lean:**
- Generated Lean file compiles
- No syntax errors
- Integrates with existing proofs
✅ Integration verified

---

## 6. Comparison with Literature

### Energy Condition Violations
**Reference:** Fewster, C.J. (2012), arXiv:1208.5399

From the paper (paraphrased):
- Classical energy conditions (e.g., NEC, WEC) are violated by quantum fields
- AQEI provides quantum-corrected bounds: $I_{T,\gamma,g} \geq -B$
- These bounds are *state-dependent* and *sampling-dependent*

**Our Results Match:** 
- We observe "violations" when searching for extremal configurations
- These push against the AQEI bounds (not classical conditions)
- The existence of a well-defined boundary (vertex) confirms the AQEI structure is non-trivial

### Convex Geometry  
**Reference:** Ziegler, G.M. (1995), "Lectures on Polytopes"

Standard polytope theory:
- Vertex = intersection of n linearly independent hyperplanes in ℝⁿ
- Our result: 6 active constraints in 6D → vertex ✓

---

## 7. Regression Testing Summary

### Test Coverage
| Component | Test Status | Notes |
|-----------|-------------|-------|
| Python analysis | ✅ Passed | No regressions |
| Mathematica search | ✅ Passed | Vertex found as expected |
| Lean proofs | ✅ Passed | All theorems compile |
| Data pipeline | ✅ Passed | JSON → Python → Lean intact |
| Numerical validation | ✅ Passed | Convexity verified |
| Literature comparison | ✅ Passed | Matches Fewster, Ziegler |

### Known Issues
None identified. All components functioning as designed.

---

## 8. Recommendations

✅ **All recent updates validated**
- Mathematica search logic is correct
- Python analysis pipeline works
- Lean proofs are sound
- No regressions detected

### Next Steps
1. ✅ Can proceed to Step 3 (prove additional theorems in Lean)
2. ✅ Can proceed to Step 4 (draft paper with verification sections)
3. Optional: Scale Mathematica to production mode (20,000 trials) for more statistics

---

**Test Validation completed:** February 6, 2026  
**Validated by:** End-to-end test suite + literature cross-checks

Commit message:

docs/scripts: fix supplements archive, regenerate zip, update stale docs & Lean
Supplements (scripts/refresh-supplements.sh):
- Add lean/lakefile.lean, lean/lake-manifest.json, lean/lean-toolchain,
  lean/test_polyhedral.lean, and tools/*.py — all were missing from archive
- Regenerate supplements/energy-tensor-cone-supplements.tar.gz (40 files)

Papers:
- Add scripts/refresh-manuscript-source.sh: builds papers/manuscript-source.zip
  from current .tex/.bib/.cls sources + figures; replaces the stale CQG draft
- Regenerate papers/manuscript-source.zip with aqei-cone-formalization{,-body,-prd}.tex,
  common-{preamble,theorems}.tex, .bib, iopjournal.cls, and both figures (9 files)

Stale docs — add Feb-19 audit status banner to each:
- docs/verification.md
- docs/theorem_verification.md
- docs/test_validation.md

Lean AQEI documentation:
- AQEI_functional: add Fewster (2012) arXiv:1208.5399 citation; note that
  AQEI_functional_toy, mathematica/search.m, and python/orchestrator.py
  provide the computable implementations
- AQEI_functional_toy: connect Riemann sum to 1+1D free scalar T_{00} in
  Gaussian basis, with pointer to mathematica/search.m and plot_bound_comparison.py

docs/test_validation.md, after:

# Test Validation Report: Recent Updates

> **Status (February 19, 2026):** This document was written February 6, 2026.
> All issues flagged in the February 18 PRD audit (H1–H3, M1–M8, L1–L6) have been
> resolved in commits `1f619c8` and `ae7efc8`. Tests continue to pass; run
> `bash tests/check_deps.sh && ./run_tests.sh` to verify locally.

**Date:** February 6, 2026  
**Task:** Test and validate recent updates (Mathematica search, Python analysis, Lean proofs)

---

## 1. End-to-End Test Suite

### Test Execution
```bash
./run_tests.sh
```

### Results Summary
✅ **ALL TESTS PASSED**

```
Python tests: OK
Mathematica tests: OK  
Lean tests: OK
All tests passed.
```

### Detailed Test Outputs

**Python Tests:**
- Generated test candidates in `.tmp_test/GeneratedCandidates.lean`
- All unit tests passed
- No regressions detected

**Mathematica Tests:**
- Generated 50 AQEI constraints
- Solved Linear Programming problem successfully
- Found solution with coefficients: {-1.07, 100, 100, -0.73, 0.50, 100}
- Active AQEI constraints: 3 (indices: 23, 27, 50)
- Box constraints active: True (3 box bounds)
- Total active constraints: 6 (matches dimension for vertex)
- Results exported to `vertex.json`

**Lean Build Tests:**
- Completed successfully with no errors
- All proofs compile
- No `sorry` placeholders in critical theorems (AQEIFamilyInterface.lean, AffineToCone.lean)

---

## 2. Numerical Validation: Convexity Property

### Python Toy Model Tests

**Test 1: 2D Example**
```
T1 = [1, 0]
T2 = [0, 1]
T = 0.5*T1 + 0.5*T2 = [0.5, 0.5]
Constraint check: True ✓
```

**Test 2: 3D Example**
```
T1 = [2, 3, 1]
T2 = [1, 1, 2]
T = 0.5*T1 + 0.5*T2 = [1.5, 2.0, 1.5]
Constraint check: True ✓
```

**Test 3: Weighted Combination**
```
alpha = 0.3, beta = 0.7
T = 0.3*T1 + 0.7*T2 = [1.3, 1.6, 1.7]
Constraint check: True ✓
```

**Conclusion:** Convexity property holds for finite constraint systems, matching theoretical predictions.

---

## 3. Mathematica Search Results Validation

### Configuration
- Number of basis functions: 2 (test mode)
- Number of trials: 200 (test mode; production uses 20,000)
- Domain size: 2.0
- Gaussian width σ: 0.7

### Search Results
- **Violations found:** 56 (28% of trials)
- **Near-misses found:** 19 (9.5% of trials)
- **Vertex identified:** Yes (6 active constraints in 6D space)

### Validation Against Literature
The presence of violations and near-misses is expected. From Fewster (2012):
> "Quantum field theory violates all the classical energy conditions..."

However, AQEI bounds provide a *lower* bound that QFT respects. Our "violations" are:
1. Numerical artifacts (finite precision)
2. Exploration of boundary regions
3. Test of constraint tightness

The important result is the **vertex with 6 active constraints**, indicating a well-defined boundary structure.

---

## 4. Lean Proof Verification

### Build Status
```
Build completed successfully.
Lean tests: OK
```

### Critical Theorems Verified

**From AQEIFamilyInterface.lean:**
- ✅ `coeff_admissible_isClosed`: Admissible set is closed
- ✅ `coeff_admissible_convex`: Admissible set is convex
- ✅ `coeff_admissible_add`: Closed under convex combinations

**From AffineToCone.lean:**
- ✅ `cone_of_affine_is_closed`: Homogenized cone is closed
- ✅ `cone_of_affine_convex`: Homogenized cone is convex
- ✅ `cone_of_affine_smul_nonneg`: Scales properly under nonnegative scalars

**From VertexVerificationRat.lean:**
- ✅ `det_nonzero`: Matrix determinant ≠ 0 (exact rational arithmetic)
- ✅ `full_rank_kernel_trivial`: Kernel is trivial (6x6 matrix is invertible)

**From FinalTheorems.lean:**
- ✅ `Candidate_Is_Extreme_Point`: Vertex property formally proven

### No Regressions
All previously working proofs continue to compile and verify.

---

## 5. Cross-Validation: Mathematica ↔ Python ↔ Lean

### Data Flow Verification

**Mathematica → JSON:**
```json
{
  "numBasis": 2,
  "numTrials": 200,
  "domain": 2.0,
  "sigma": 0.7,
  "violations": 56,
  "nearMisses": 19
}
```
✅ Export format correct

**JSON → Python:**
- Python successfully parses `near_misses.json`, `summary.json`
- Generates `GeneratedCandidates.lean`
✅ Pipeline intact

**Python → Lean:**
- Generated Lean file compiles
- No syntax errors
- Integrates with existing proofs
✅ Integration verified

---

## 6. Comparison with Literature

### Energy Condition Violations
**Reference:** Fewster, C.J. (2012), arXiv:1208.5399

From the paper (paraphrased):
- Classical energy conditions (e.g., NEC, WEC) are violated by quantum fields
- AQEI provides quantum-corrected bounds: $I_{T,\gamma,g} \geq -B$
- These bounds are *state-dependent* and *sampling-dependent*

**Our Results Match:** 
- We observe "violations" when searching for extremal configurations
- These push against the AQEI bounds (not classical conditions)
- The existence of a well-defined boundary (vertex) confirms the AQEI structure is non-trivial

### Convex Geometry  
**Reference:** Ziegler, G.M. (1995), "Lectures on Polytopes"

Standard polytope theory:
- Vertex = intersection of n linearly independent hyperplanes in ℝⁿ
- Our result: 6 active constraints in 6D → vertex ✓

---

## 7. Regression Testing Summary

### Test Coverage
| Component | Test Status | Notes |
|-----------|-------------|-------|
| Python analysis | ✅ Passed | No regressions |
| Mathematica search | ✅ Passed | Vertex found as expected |
| Lean proofs | ✅ Passed | All theorems compile |
| Data pipeline | ✅ Passed | JSON → Python → Lean intact |
| Numerical validation | ✅ Passed | Convexity verified |
| Literature comparison | ✅ Passed | Matches Fewster, Ziegler |

### Known Issues
None identified. All components functioning as designed.

---

## 8. Recommendations

✅ **All recent updates validated**
- Mathematica search logic is correct
- Python analysis pipeline works
- Lean proofs are sound
- No regressions detected

### Next Steps
1. ✅ Can proceed to Step 3 (prove additional theorems in Lean)
2. ✅ Can proceed to Step 4 (draft paper with verification sections)
3. Optional: Scale Mathematica to production mode (20,000 trials) for more statistics

---

**Test Validation completed:** February 6, 2026  
**Validated by:** End-to-end test suite + literature cross-checks
