docs/verification.md, before:

# Verification Report: Mathematical Definitions Against Literature

> **Status (February 19, 2026):** This document was written February 6, 2026.
> All issues flagged in the February 18 PRD audit (H1–H3, M1–M8, L1–L6) have been
> resolved in commits `1f619c8` and `ae7efc8`. The definitions below remain accurate
> and the Lean build is clean (17 source files, zero `sorry` in core theorems).

**Date:** February 6, 2026  
**Task:** Cross-check core definitions in Lean against standard QFT/GR references

---

## 1. Lorentzian Signature Convention

### Our Definition (Lorentz.lean)
```lean
def is_timelike (v : V) : Prop := L.inner v v < 0
def is_spacelike (v : V) : Prop := 0 < L.inner v v
def is_null (v : V) : Prop := L.inner v v = 0
```

**Convention:** Mostly-plus signature (-,+,+,+)
- Timelike vectors satisfy ⟨v,v⟩ < 0
- Spacelike vectors satisfy ⟨v,v⟩ > 0
- Null vectors satisfy ⟨v,v⟩ = 0

### Verification
✅ **CONFIRMED:** This matches the standard convention used in relativistic QFT and general relativity.

**Numerical Test (1+1D Minkowski):**
```
Timelike (1,0): ⟨v,v⟩ = -1 (< 0 ✓)
Spacelike (0,1): ⟨v,v⟩ = 1 (> 0 ✓)
Null (1,1)/√2: ⟨v,v⟩ = 0.000000 (≈ 0 ✓)
```

### Literature Reference
The mostly-plus signature is standard in:
- Wald, R.M. (1984). "General Relativity"
- Fewster, C.J. (2012). "Lectures on quantum energy inequalities" [arXiv:1208.5399]

---

## 2. AQEI Functional Definition

### Our Definition (AQEI.lean)
```lean
def satisfies_AQEI (T : StressEnergy V L) (bounds : Bounds) : Prop :=
  ∀ (γ : Worldline V L) (s : SamplingFunction), 
    AQEI_functional (γ := γ) (s := s) T ≥ -bounds γ s
```

**Mathematical Form:**
$$I_{T,\gamma,g} = \int g(t) T(\gamma(t))(u(t), u(t)) \, dt \geq -B_{\gamma,g}$$

where:
- $T$ is the stress-energy tensor
- $\gamma$ is a worldline with tangent vector $u$
- $g$ is a non-negative sampling function
- $B_{\gamma,g}$ is the quantum bound

### Verification
✅ **CONFIRMED:** This matches the standard AQEI definition in the literature.

**Symbolic Verification (SymPy):**
For a Gaussian sampling function $g(t) = e^{-t^2}$ and constant energy density $\rho$:
```
∫_{-∞}^{∞} exp(-t²) * ρ dt = √π * ρ
```
This integral computation is consistent with our Mathematica implementation.

### Literature Reference
**Primary Source:** Fewster, C.J. (2012). "Lectures on quantum energy inequalities" [arXiv:1208.5399]

From the abstract:
> "Quantum field theory violates all the classical energy conditions of general relativity. 
> Nonetheless, it turns out that quantum field theories satisfy remnants of the classical 
> energy conditions, known as Quantum Energy Inequalities (QEIs)..."

**Additional Reference:**
Fewster, C.J., Olum, K.D., Pfenning, M.J. (2007). "Averaged null energy condition in spacetimes with boundaries." Phys. Rev. D 75, 025007.
```bibtex
@article{PhysRevD.75.025007,
  title = {Averaged null energy condition in spacetimes with boundaries},
  author = {Fewster, Christopher J. and Olum, Ken D. and Pfenning, Michael J.},
  journal = {Phys. Rev. D},
  volume = {75},
  issue = {2},
  pages = {025007},
  year = {2007},
  doi = {10.1103/PhysRevD.75.025007}
}
```

---

## 3. Stress-Energy Tensor Definition

### Our Definition (StressEnergy.lean)
```lean
structure StressEnergy (V : Type) [AddCommMonoid V] [Module ℝ V] (L : LorentzSpace V) where
  T : V → V → ℝ
  symmetric : ∀ x y, T x y = T y x
```

### Verification
✅ **CONFIRMED:** Stress-energy tensors are symmetric bilinear forms, matching the standard definition.

**Properties Verified:**
- Symmetry: $T(u,v) = T(v,u)$
- Linearity: Properly implements addition and scalar multiplication
- Energy density: $\rho = T(u,u)$ for timelike vector $u$

### Literature Reference
Standard definition in:
- Hawking, S.W. & Ellis, G.F.R. (1973). "The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time"
- Wald, R.M. (1984). "General Relativity"

---

## 4. Convex Cone Structure

### Our Claim
The set $\mathcal{A} = \{T \mid \forall \gamma, g: I_{T,\gamma,g} \geq -B_{\gamma,g}\}$ is:
1. Closed (in the appropriate topology)
2. Convex
3. Generates a cone under homogenization

### Verification Status
✅ **PROVEN in Lean** (see AQEIFamilyInterface.lean, AffineToCone.lean)

**Note:** The admissible set $\mathcal{A}$ is convex but not literally a cone under positive scaling (due to the non-zero bound $B$). The homogenization construction in AffineToCone.lean produces a genuine cone in one higher dimension.

**Mathematical Proof (Convexity):**
For $T_1, T_2 \in \mathcal{A}$ and $\alpha, \beta \geq 0$ with $\alpha + \beta = 1$:
$$I_{\alpha T_1 + \beta T_2, \gamma, g} = \alpha I_{T_1, \gamma, g} + \beta I_{T_2, \gamma, g} \geq -\alpha B - \beta B = -B$$

This follows from linearity of the integral.

---

## 5. Discrepancies and Notes

### Potential Issues Identified
None. All definitions match standard literature conventions.

### Implementation Notes
1. **AQEI_functional placeholder:** The current Lean definition returns 0 as a placeholder. This is intentional—the full QFT-defined functional requires specifying:
   - The topology on the stress-energy model space
   - Proof that AQEI functionals are continuous linear maps
   - Connection to quantum state expectations

2. **Finite Approximations:** Our Mathematica/Python implementations use finite-dimensional discretizations (Gaussian basis in 1+1D). These are approximations to the full infinite-dimensional theory.

3. **Signature Count:** The `signature_neg_count` field in LorentzSpace is a placeholder for future work distinguishing different spacetime dimensions.

---

## 6. Summary

✅ **All core mathematical definitions verified against literature**

| Component | Status | Reference |
|-----------|--------|-----------|
| Lorentzian signature | ✓ Verified | Wald (1984), Fewster (2012) |
| AQEI integral form | ✓ Verified | Fewster (2012), arXiv:1208.5399 |
| Stress-energy symmetry | ✓ Verified | Hawking & Ellis (1973) |
| Convex cone structure | ✓ Proven | AQEIFamilyInterface.lean |
| Numerical tests | ✓ Passed | SymPy verification |

### Recommendations
1. ✅ Continue with current definitions (no changes needed)
2. Add explicit comments in Lean files citing Fewster (2012) for AQEI
3. Document the placeholder nature of AQEI_functional in comments
4. Future work: Implement concrete functional for specific QFT (e.g., free scalar field)

---

**Verification completed:** February 6, 2026  
**Verified by:** Automated cross-checking with literature and symbolic computation

Commit message:

fix: stale satisfies_AQEI snippet; missing Python files in descriptions
docs/verification.md Section 2:
- Code snippet was showing pre-B3 named-argument syntax
  AQEI_functional (γ := γ)(s := s) T  [never existed after B3]
  replaced with current positional form: AQEI_functional (V := V) (L := L) γ s T
- bounds type: old 'Bounds' type alias (removed in B-batch) → correct
  'Worldline V L → SamplingFunction → ℝ'
- 'def' → 'noncomputable def' (current keyword)
- Added note explaining the B3 change for readers

README.md:
- Python description bullet listed only 5 files; sanity_checks.py and
  check_rational_values.py (added in C-batch) were missing

papers/aqei-cone-formalization-body.tex Key Files section:
- Data processing bullet listed only orchestrator.py + analyze_results.py;
  added sanity_checks.py and check_rational_values.py

docs/verification.md, after:

# Verification Report: Mathematical Definitions Against Literature

> **Status (February 19, 2026):** This document was written February 6, 2026.
> All issues flagged in the February 18 PRD audit (H1–H3, M1–M8, L1–L6) have been
> resolved in commits `1f619c8` and `ae7efc8`. The definitions below remain accurate
> and the Lean build is clean (17 source files, zero `sorry` in core theorems).

**Date:** February 6, 2026  
**Task:** Cross-check core definitions in Lean against standard QFT/GR references

---

## 1. Lorentzian Signature Convention

### Our Definition (Lorentz.lean)
```lean
def is_timelike (v : V) : Prop := L.inner v v < 0
def is_spacelike (v : V) : Prop := 0 < L.inner v v
def is_null (v : V) : Prop := L.inner v v = 0
```

**Convention:** Mostly-plus signature (-,+,+,+)
- Timelike vectors satisfy ⟨v,v⟩ < 0
- Spacelike vectors satisfy ⟨v,v⟩ > 0
- Null vectors satisfy ⟨v,v⟩ = 0

### Verification
✅ **CONFIRMED:** This matches the standard convention used in relativistic QFT and general relativity.

**Numerical Test (1+1D Minkowski):**
```
Timelike (1,0): ⟨v,v⟩ = -1 (< 0 ✓)
Spacelike (0,1): ⟨v,v⟩ = 1 (> 0 ✓)
Null (1,1)/√2: ⟨v,v⟩ = 0.000000 (≈ 0 ✓)
```

### Literature Reference
The mostly-plus signature is standard in:
- Wald, R.M. (1984). "General Relativity"
- Fewster, C.J. (2012). "Lectures on quantum energy inequalities" [arXiv:1208.5399]

---

## 2. AQEI Functional Definition

### Our Definition (AQEI.lean)
```lean
noncomputable def satisfies_AQEI (T : StressEnergy V L)
    (bounds : Worldline V L → SamplingFunction → ℝ) : Prop :=
  ∀ (γ : Worldline V L) (s : SamplingFunction),
    AQEI_functional (V := V) (L := L) γ s T ≥ -bounds γ s
```

*(Note: `bounds` is now typed as a function `Worldline V L → SamplingFunction → ℝ`; the earlier `Bounds` type alias was removed in the B-batch cleanup. The implicit type arguments `(V := V) (L := L)` are named; the worldline `γ` and sampling function `s` are positional — the old `(γ := γ)(s := s)` named-argument form was replaced in B3.)*

**Mathematical Form:**
$$I_{T,\gamma,g} = \int g(t) T(\gamma(t))(u(t), u(t)) \, dt \geq -B_{\gamma,g}$$

where:
- $T$ is the stress-energy tensor
- $\gamma$ is a worldline with tangent vector $u$
- $g$ is a non-negative sampling function
- $B_{\gamma,g}$ is the quantum bound

### Verification
✅ **CONFIRMED:** This matches the standard AQEI definition in the literature.

**Symbolic Verification (SymPy):**
For a Gaussian sampling function $g(t) = e^{-t^2}$ and constant energy density $\rho$:
```
∫_{-∞}^{∞} exp(-t²) * ρ dt = √π * ρ
```
This integral computation is consistent with our Mathematica implementation.

### Literature Reference
**Primary Source:** Fewster, C.J. (2012). "Lectures on quantum energy inequalities" [arXiv:1208.5399]

From the abstract:
> "Quantum field theory violates all the classical energy conditions of general relativity. 
> Nonetheless, it turns out that quantum field theories satisfy remnants of the classical 
> energy conditions, known as Quantum Energy Inequalities (QEIs)..."

**Additional Reference:**
Fewster, C.J., Olum, K.D., Pfenning, M.J. (2007). "Averaged null energy condition in spacetimes with boundaries." Phys. Rev. D 75, 025007.
```bibtex
@article{PhysRevD.75.025007,
  title = {Averaged null energy condition in spacetimes with boundaries},
  author = {Fewster, Christopher J. and Olum, Ken D. and Pfenning, Michael J.},
  journal = {Phys. Rev. D},
  volume = {75},
  issue = {2},
  pages = {025007},
  year = {2007},
  doi = {10.1103/PhysRevD.75.025007}
}
```

---

## 3. Stress-Energy Tensor Definition

### Our Definition (StressEnergy.lean)
```lean
structure StressEnergy (V : Type) [AddCommMonoid V] [Module ℝ V] (L : LorentzSpace V) where
  T : V → V → ℝ
  symmetric : ∀ x y, T x y = T y x
```

### Verification
✅ **CONFIRMED:** Stress-energy tensors are symmetric bilinear forms, matching the standard definition.

**Properties Verified:**
- Symmetry: $T(u,v) = T(v,u)$
- Linearity: Properly implements addition and scalar multiplication
- Energy density: $\rho = T(u,u)$ for timelike vector $u$

### Literature Reference
Standard definition in:
- Hawking, S.W. & Ellis, G.F.R. (1973). "The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time"
- Wald, R.M. (1984). "General Relativity"

---

## 4. Convex Cone Structure

### Our Claim
The set $\mathcal{A} = \{T \mid \forall \gamma, g: I_{T,\gamma,g} \geq -B_{\gamma,g}\}$ is:
1. Closed (in the appropriate topology)
2. Convex
3. Generates a cone under homogenization

### Verification Status
✅ **PROVEN in Lean** (see AQEIFamilyInterface.lean, AffineToCone.lean)

**Note:** The admissible set $\mathcal{A}$ is convex but not literally a cone under positive scaling (due to the non-zero bound $B$). The homogenization construction in AffineToCone.lean produces a genuine cone in one higher dimension.

**Mathematical Proof (Convexity):**
For $T_1, T_2 \in \mathcal{A}$ and $\alpha, \beta \geq 0$ with $\alpha + \beta = 1$:
$$I_{\alpha T_1 + \beta T_2, \gamma, g} = \alpha I_{T_1, \gamma, g} + \beta I_{T_2, \gamma, g} \geq -\alpha B - \beta B = -B$$

This follows from linearity of the integral.

---

## 5. Discrepancies and Notes

### Potential Issues Identified
None. All definitions match standard literature conventions.

### Implementation Notes
1. **AQEI_functional placeholder:** The current Lean definition returns 0 as a placeholder. This is intentional—the full QFT-defined functional requires specifying:
   - The topology on the stress-energy model space
   - Proof that AQEI functionals are continuous linear maps
   - Connection to quantum state expectations

2. **Finite Approximations:** Our Mathematica/Python implementations use finite-dimensional discretizations (Gaussian basis in 1+1D). These are approximations to the full infinite-dimensional theory.

3. **Signature Count:** The `signature_neg_count` field in LorentzSpace is a placeholder for future work distinguishing different spacetime dimensions.

---

## 6. Summary

✅ **All core mathematical definitions verified against literature**

| Component | Status | Reference |
|-----------|--------|-----------|
| Lorentzian signature | ✓ Verified | Wald (1984), Fewster (2012) |
| AQEI integral form | ✓ Verified | Fewster (2012), arXiv:1208.5399 |
| Stress-energy symmetry | ✓ Verified | Hawking & Ellis (1973) |
| Convex cone structure | ✓ Proven | AQEIFamilyInterface.lean |
| Numerical tests | ✓ Passed | SymPy verification |

### Recommendations
1. ✅ Continue with current definitions (no changes needed)
2. Add explicit comments in Lean files citing Fewster (2012) for AQEI
3. Document the placeholder nature of AQEI_functional in comments
4. Future work: Implement concrete functional for specific QFT (e.g., free scalar field)

---

**Verification completed:** February 6, 2026  
**Verified by:** Automated cross-checking with literature and symbolic computation
